The novel coronavirus disease COVID-19 has spread from Wuhan, China to the rest of the world in a matter of months [1, 49]. As a result, an increasing number of countries have introduced travel restrictions, imposed social distancing measures, and even confined their citizens in their houses to slow and ideally halt the spread of COVID-19.
Against this backdrop, we see burgeoning efforts to introduce contact tracing technologies, which aim to identify and characterize disease-spreading human interactions, ultimately allowing both individuals and policymakers to make more effective decisions. Amongst them, we can distinguish between location-based systems2 such as GPS, WiFi triangulation or QR code “check-ins”, and proximity-based systems3 such as Bluetooth. The promise of these contact tracing systems is that automated and fine-grained contact monitoring of individuals may allow for:

I. More accurate predictions: New data sources may allow us to predict the spread of COVID-19 at an unprecedented spatiotemporal resolution. This includes when and where new individual infections may happen and how likely these events are to occur.
II. More effective containment and mitigation: Tracing systems may help us design more effective strategies to slow down or even prevent the spread of COVID-19, thus allowing authorities to gradually lift the most restrictive measures with more precision and confidence.
III. Data-driven insights into disease parameters: Accurate contact tracing may yield insights into the relative importance of different modalities of disease transmission and allow inference of the unknown parameters of the transmission and course of COVID-19.
To fulfill this promise, we need to utilize data-driven models and inference algorithms that can operate at a high spatiotemporal resolution and make use of contact tracing data of individuals. Unfortunately, most of the classical epidemiological literature [4, 13, 23, 37, 38] has primarily focused on developing models for general population dynamics rather than the infectious state of any given individual in the population.
More recently, there has been research on modeling individual dynamics of epidemics [2, 7, 8, 43, 44]. However, this work typically resorts to mean-field theory and thus does not characterize the dynamic infectious state of each individual over time. The work closest in spirit to ours is by Ferguson et al. [14, 15], who use a stochastic model of individuals situated at random locations in space to analyze strategies for preventing and containing influenza. However, they use ad-hoc assumptions about individual mobility patterns and cannot characterize the functioning of modern contact tracing systems. Finally, in the context of the current COVID-19 outbreak, there has been a flurry of work contemporary to ours [3, 11, 12, 16, 17, 27, 28, 31, 45, 47], including research in which Ferguson et al. [16] re-use the above mentioned influenza models [14, 15]. However, none of these papers can characterize the fine-grained effects of testing, contact tracing, and containment interventions over time at a local level. The present work attempts to fill this gap.
We introduce a novel modeling framework that is expressive enough to make fine-grained spatiotemporal predictions and make use of contact tracing data of individuals. Our model uses marked temporal point processes [10] to represent events in which
- individuals are exposed, asymptomatic, presymptomatic, symptomatic, hospitalized, recovered, or deceased (Epidemiology).
- individuals check in at different points of interest, such as supermarkets, pharmacies, or testing site locations, and meet (and possibly infect) each other (Mobility).
- health authorities test individuals and individuals receive the outcome of a test (Testing).
- individuals follow social distancing measures, including quarantines and curfews (Social distancing). points of interest implement hygienic and capacity-limiting measures or closures (Business restrictions).
Within this paradigm, our model can be fully defined by way of a set of conditional intensity functions, or hazard functions. Our model is agnostic to the particular choice of conditional intensity function for mobility patterns. We further introduce a new intensity function that is able to characterize the influence that mobility patterns, as well as social distancing measures and business restrictions, have on the risk that each individual with the virus poses on their community. Moreover, we follow the recent literature on COVID-19 [17, 27] to define the specific functional form of the intensity functions that characterize the times when individuals become asymptomatic, presymptomatic, symptomatic, hospitalized, recovered, or deceased, and specify their parameter values accordingly. For testing, social distancing, and business restrictions, our model expresses a variety of real-world interventions. In addition, our model is also able to characterize the functioning of both location-based and proximity-based contact tracing systems under different contact tracing algorithms.
Given a fixed set of individual mobility patterns, we design an efficient sampling algorithm for our model, summarized in Algorithm 1, that is able to predict the spread of COVID-19 under different testing & tracing strategies, social distancing measures, and business restrictions using Monte Carlo roll-outs. One of the key
components of our sampling algorithm is the use of the superposition principle and thinning to generate faithful simulations. Ultimately, this allows us to accurately estimate the effect of a variety of interventions and what-if scenarios given a fixed set of location traces. Moreover, if in addition to the set of individual mobility patterns, we also have access to historical aggregate longitudinal testing data, we introduce an inference procedure that uses our sampling algorithm and Bayesian Optimization (BO) [39] to estimate: (i) the parameters of the intensity function that characterizes the risk of exposure of each individual; (ii) the percentage of asymptomatic individuals among those infected; and (iii) the relative difference in transmission rate between asymptomatic and (pre)symptomatic individuals.
Finally, we validate our modeling framework using COVID-19 data from Tübingen, a town in the southwest of Germany, and demonstrate that it can be used to estimate the effect of testing & tracing, social distancing, and business restrictions at an unprecedented spatiotemporal resolution. To enable further research in this area as well as to facilitate scientifically informed policymaking, we release an open-source implementation of our framework at https://github.com/covid19-model.
